>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, AUGUST 13: THE RACE
FOR THE WHITE HOUSE FOCUSED ON
THE KEY STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA;
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AS
SILICON VALLEY BOOMS, SOME HAVE
A SOLUTION TO SKYROCKETING
RENT-- LIVING IN THEIR VEHICLES.
>> YES, I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE A
HOME.
HOWEVER, THIS IS MY HOME.
I'M NOT HOMELESS.
>> Brangham: AND, THE BOYS
KIDNAPPED BY THE TERRORIST GROUP
BOKO HARAM.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
DONALD TRUMP SAYS HE MUST WIN
THE BATTLEGROUND STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA TO WIN THE WHITE
HOUSE, BUT OPINION POLLS SHOW HE
HAS AN UPHILL CLIMB.
TRUMP IS DOWN BY ABOUT TEN
PERCENTAGE POINTS TO HILLARY
CLINTON IN THE FOUR MOST RECENT
SURVEYS OF PENNSYLVANIA VOTERS,
YET HE TOLD SUPPORTERS IN
ALTOONA LAST NIGHT, HE FEARS
VOTER FRAUD COULD PROPEL CLINTON
TO VICTORY IN THE KEYSTONE
STATE.
>> SHE CAN'T BEAT WHAT'S
HAPPENING HERE.
THE ONLY WAY THEY CAN BEAT IT,
IN MY OPINION-- AND I MEAN THIS
100%-- IF IN CERTAIN SECTIONS OF
THE STATE, THEY CHEAT, OKAY?
>> Brangham: THERE'S BEEN NO
EVIDENCE OF WIDESPREAD IN-PERSON
VOTER FRAUD IN PENNSYLVANIA OR
IN ANY OTHER STATE.
HILLARY CLINTON RETURNS TO
PENNSYLVANIA MONDAY TO CAMPAIGN
WITH VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN IN
HIS HOME TOWN OF SCRANTON.
HILLARY AND BILL CLINTON
RELEASED THEIR JOINT 2015 TAX
RETURN YESTERDAY, REVEALING THE
COUPLE EARNED $10.6 MILLION LAST
YEAR, MOSTLY FROM SPEECHES AND
BOOK ROYALTIES, AND PAID AN
EFFECTIVE FEDERAL TAX RATE OF
34%.
THE RETURN IS POSTED ON HER
CAMPAIGN WEB SITE, ALONG WITH
TEN YEARS OF TAX RETURNS FROM
HER RUNNING MATE, VIRGINIA
SENATOR TIM KAINE.
THE DOCUMENT RELEASES AND A NEW
CLINTON CAMPAIGN AD ONLINE ARE
PRESSURING TRUMP TO RELEASE
HIS TAX RETURNS.
TRUMP, WHO IS A BILLIONAIRE, IS
THE FIRST PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
IN 40 YEARS NOT TO REFUSE TO
RELEASE ANY TAX RETURNS.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE HAS
ISSUED A FLOOD WATCH FOR
SOUTHWEST LOUISIANA-- INCLUDING
NEW ORLEANS-- UNTIL TOMORROW
AFTERNOON.
THE WARNING CAME AFTER TEN
INCHES OF RAIN FELL ALONG
LOUISIANA'S GULF COAST OVER THE
PAST 24 HOURS, AND SIX MORE
INCHES WERE FORECAST FOR TODAY.
AT LEAST TWO RIVERS IN LOUISIANA
ARE EXPECTED TO CREST THIS
WEEKEND TO RECORD LEVELS, AND
THE FLOODING IS BLAMED FOR AT
LEAST TWO DEATHS.
LOUISIANA GOVERNOR JOHN BEL
EDWARDS SAID TODAY THE NATIONAL
GUARD AND OTHERS HAVE RESCUED
MORE THAN A THOUSAND PEOPLE AND
A HUNDRED PETS FROM HOMES AND
CARS IN WHAT HE CALLED
"HISTORIC" FLOODING.
>> BECAUSE THESE ARE RECORD
FLOODS, WE DON'T KNOW HOW WIDE
THE WATER IS GOING TO GET IN
THOSE AREAS.
THIS IS UNPRECEDENTED, SO WE
DON'T HAVE RECORDS THAT WE CAN
GO BACK AND SEE WHO ALL IS GOING
TO BE IMPACTED.
>> Brangham: GOVERNOR EDWARDS
HAS TEMPORARILY MOVED OUT OF THE
EXECUTIVE MANSION IN BATON ROUGE
AFTER THE MANSION'S BASEMENT WAS
FLOODED.
IN SYRIA, THE BIGGEST DEFEAT FOR
ISIS IN MORE THAN A YEAR.
REBEL FORCES IN NORTHERN SYRIA,
BACKED BY U.S. AIR STRIKES, SAY
THEY'VE SEIZED CONTROL OF THE
CITY OF MANBIJ, NEAR THE
COUNTRY'S BORDER WITH TURKEY.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE SYRIAN
DEMOCRATIC FORCES SAYS THEIR
FIGHTERS FREED MORE THAN 2,000
CIVILIANS HELD BY ISIS
MILITANTS.
MORE THAN 100,000 CIVILIANS WERE
DISPLACED IN 73 DAYS OF
FIGHTING.
THE LOSS OF MANBIJ DEPRIVES ISIS
OF A KEY ROUTE FOR SUPPLIES AND
RECRUITS FROM ACROSS SYRIA'S
POROUS BORDER WITH TURKEY.
MANBIJ RESIDENTS CELEBRATED THE
ISIS DEFEAT IN THE STREETS.
SOME MEN SHAVED THEIR BEARDS,
AND SOME WOMEN BURNED BURQAS
THAT COVERED THEIR FACES-- BOTH
REQUIRED BY ISIS' STRICT
RELIGIOUS RULES.
THESE COLLEGE STUDENTS ARE
WORKING TO ADDRESS ISSUES OF
RACE WITHIN THE MUSLIM
COMMUNITY.
READ MORE ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Brangham: THE ISLAMIC
TERRORIST GROUP KNOWN AS BOKO
HARAM GAINED GLOBAL INFAMY FOR
KIDNAPPING CLOSE TO 300
SCHOOLGIRLS IN NIGERIA IN 2014.
BUT THE GROUP HAS ALSO KIDNAPPED
MORE THAN 10,000 BOYS OVER THE
PAST THREE YEARS, ACCORDING TO
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH.
WHAT HAPPENS TO THESE BOYS--
INCLUDING BOKO HARAM'S EFFORTS
TO CONVERT THEM INTO SOLDIERS--
IS THE SUBJECT OF AN ARTICLE
THIS WEEK CO-WRITTEN BY "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER DREW
HINSHAW, WHO JOINS ME NOW.
BEFORE WE GET INTO YOUR
REPORTING, HELP US UNDERSTAND
WHAT IS BOKO HARAM DOING AND
WHAT DO THEY WANT AND HOW LONG
HAVE THEY BEEN WAGING THIS
INSURGENCY IN NIGERIA AND
ELSEWHERE?
>> SURE, SINCE ABOUT 2009, BOKO
HARAM HAS BEEN WAGING A REALLY
SCORCHED-EARTH, VIOLENT
CAMPAIGN TO CREATE AN ISLAMIST
STATE IN THE NORTHEAST OF
NIGERIA, CHASE AWAY SOLDIERS AND
GENERALLY ATTACK PEOPLE WHO
DON'T SUBSCRIBE TO THEIR
ULTRAVIOLENT IDEOLOGY.
>> Brangham: YOUR REPORTING
DETAILED HOW BOKO HARAM HAS BEEN
KIDNAPPING THOUSANDS OF THESE
BOYS.
YOU SPOKE TO ABOUT A DOZEN OR SO
WHO ESCAPED BOKO HARAM.
WHAT DID THEY TELL YOU ABOUT
THEIR EXPERIENCE?
>> I THINK THEY'RE ALL SHAKEN BY
IT, UNDERSTANDABLY.
THE THE ASTONISHING ASPECT OF
IT, A LOT OF THEM AT 12, 15
YEARS OLD, WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR
RAISING CHILDREN WHO WERE EVEN
YOUNGER THAN THEM.
IN ONE CASE WE TALKED TO-- HE
WAS 10 YEARS OLD AT THE TIME WHO
HELPED RAISED INFANT, TODDLERS,
ESSENTIALLY TO BE JIHADISTS.
SO YOU HAVE IN THESE KIND OF
ENCAMPMENTS, CHILDREN RAISING
CHILDREN TO BE TERRORIST.
>> Brangham: WHY IS BOKO HARAM
TAKING THESE KID?
WHAT DO THEY WANT TO USE THEM
FOR?
>> ONE EMPLOY I SPOKE TO, BOKO
HARAM EXPECT TO BE MARTYRS.
MANY ADULTS ARE EXPECTED TO DIE
IN BATTLE AND ACHIEVE MARTYRDOM
AND LOOKING FOR A NEW GENERATION
TO KEEP THEIR PROJECT GOING
AFTER THEY DIE IN BATTLE.
SOME WAYS THEY ARE SUCCESSFUL.
OBVIOUSLY THE ONES WE TALKED TO
ARE THE ONES WHO ESCAPED, THE
ONES WHO SAID WE'VE HAD ENOUGH.
BUT ALL OF THEM, WITHOUT
EXCEPTION, SAID IF YOU GO TO
THOSE CAMPS MOST ARE GENUINE
BELIEVERS AND REALLY CONVERTED.
>> Brangham: BUT BOKO HARAM IS
THE ONE DOING THE CONVERSION.
THESE KID DON'T COME TO THEM AS
RADICALS.
>> EVEN IF THEY'RE COMING AS
RADICALS THEY HAVE NO IDEA WHAT
THEY'RE DOING.
THEY'RE VICTIMS AS MUCH AS
PERPETRATORS.
SOME OF THEM ARE GUILTY OF
HEINOUS THINGS-- RAPE, MURDER,
KILLING-- ALL KIND OF HORRIBLE
THINGS.
AND YET THEY'RE ALSO VICTIMS.
THEY'RE ALSO KIDS PLUCKED OUT OF
VILLAGES, FORCED TO WATCH
BEHEADINGS, WITH ALL KIND OF
INDOCTRINATION, BEATEN, STARVED,
AND AT SOME POINT, THEY CONVERT.
>> Brangham: WE HAVE SEEN THE
USE OF CHILD SOLDIERS IN THE
PAST.
WHAT IS DIFFERENT ABOUT THIS?
IS IT THE SCALE OF THE PROBLEM
HERE?
>> YOU HAVE HERE A SITUATION
WHERE YOU CAN'T GO TALK TO BOKO
HARAM.
IN THE CIVIL WAR IN LIBERIA AND
SIERRA LEONE, A RESEARCHER WITH
HUMAN RIGHT WATCH TOLD ME SHE
WENT INTO GUINEA AND SPOKE TO
SOME OF THE PEOPLE AND SAID,
"HEY, LOOK, IF YOU DON'T KNOCK
THIS OFF, ONE DAY YOU COULD FACE
A WAR CRIMES TRIAL."
AND IT WORKED.
A U.N. ENVOY CAN'T GO INTO RURAL
NORTHEASTERN NIGERIA AND SIT
DOWN WITH THE LEADER OF BOKO
HARAM AND SAY, "WHAT YOU'RE
DOING IS WRONG ACCORDING TO
THESE RULES."
YOU CAN'T IMMOBILIZE THEM.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, DREW
HINSHAW FROM THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THIS.
>> THANK YOU, TOO.
>> Brangham: FACED WITH SOME OF
THEMOST EXPENSIVE HOUSING IN
THE NATION, MANY RESIDENTS OF
THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA ARE
SIMPLY PRICED OUT OF THE RENTAL
MARKET.
AN HOUR SOUTH OF SAN FRANCISCO,
IN SILICON VALLEY, THE MECCA FOR
HIGH-PAYING U.S. COMPUTER AND
TECHNOLOGY JOBS, SOME RESIDENTS
ARE TURNING TO CARS, VANS AND
R.V.s AS PLACES TO LIVE AND CALL
HOME.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOANNE
JENNINGS REPORTS HOW THIS TREND
EXPOSES AN UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCE OF AN ECONOMIC BOOM
FOR BOTH THE MIDDLE CLASS AND
THE WORKING POOR.
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR
ONGOING SERIES, "CHASING THE
DREAM," ABOUT POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA.
>> Reporter: MOUNTAIN VIEW,
CALIFORNIA, IS HOME TO HUNDREDS
OF TECHNOLOGY FIRMS, FROM NASA'S
SUPERCOMPUTING DIVISION TO TECH
GIANT GOOGLE, WHICH ALONE
EMPLOYS 20,000 PEOPLE HERE.
THE CITY'S UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS
2.5%, HALF THE NATIONAL AVERAGE,
AND THE MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME
TOPS $100,000 A YEAR.
BUT THERE ARE PERILS TO THIS
PROSPERITY, SAYS MOUNTAIN VIEW
MAYOR PAT SHOWATER.
>> SO MANY PEOPLE HAVE COME HERE
THAT THE RENTS, JUST BECAUSE OF
SUPPLY AND DEMAND, HAVE GONE
THROUGH THE ROOF.
>> Reporter: THE MEDIAN RENT FOR
AN APARTMENT OR HOUSE IS $4,390
A MONTH, A 54% JUMP SINCE 2012.
>> IT DOESN'T MATTER WHETHER YOU
MAKE $100,000 OR NOT; YOU
HAVEN'T PLANNED FOR A 54% RENT
INCREASE, AND IT'S CAUSED A LOT
OF PEOPLE TO BE DISPLACED.
>> Reporter: A SMALL BUT GROWING
NUMBER OF THE CITY'S 80,000
RESIDENTS ARE NOW LIVING IN
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, VANS AND
CARS, LIKE THESE ON THIS STREET
NEXT TO A PARK.
>> THIS IS MY HOME, AND I'M
HAPPY HERE.
>> Reporter: 59-YEAR-OLD SCOTT
WHALEY MOVED OUT OF HIS MOUNTAIN
VIEW APARTMENT INTO A MINI-VAN
LAST NOVEMBER WHEN HE LOST HIS
JOB AS A PROPERTY MANAGER.
>> I JUST MOVED INTO MY VAN.
I SAID, YOU KNOW, UNTIL I CAN
FIND A PLACE.
THIS IS MY BEDROOM BACK HERE.
>> Reporter: WHALEY NOW LIVES IN
THIS USED 1997 R.V. HE BOUGHT
FOR $10,000, DEPLETING HIS
SAVINGS.
>> YES, I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE A
HOME, YOU KNOW.
HOWEVER, THIS IS MY HOME.
I'M NOT HOMELESS.
>> Reporter: A COUPLE MILES
AWAY, ACROSS FROM AN OFFICE
PARK, MARCIA CHRISTLEIB ALSO
MAKES HER HOME IN AN R.V.
AND THIS IS BIGGER THAN SOME OF
THE STUDIOS YOU'VE LOOKED AT?
>> IT IS.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH SHE
EARNS $65,000 A YEAR AS AN
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANT FOR
NASA, CHRISTLEIB SAYS IT'S NOT
ENOUGH TO SUPPORT HER AND HER
HUSBAND, DENNIS, WHO'S LOOKING
FOR WORK.
>> THE ONLY APARTMENT WE'VE
LOOKED AT SO FAR THAT LOOKS LIKE
IT'S IN A SAFE NEIGHBORHOOD GOES
FOR ALMOST $2,400 A MONTH.
SO, THAT'S A HUGE PORTION OF THE
SALARY, AND WE'RE JUST GOING TO
HAVE TO GIVE UP OTHER
CONVENIENCES.
I STILL CAN ONLY AFFORD THE
THINGS I COULD AFFORD WHEN I WAS
MAKING MINIMUM WAGE, BECAUSE
EVERYTHING ELSE GOES TO RENT.
>> Reporter: THE CHRISTLEIBS
TRIED TO PARK THEIR R.V. AT A
PROPER CAMPSITE, BUT THE ONLY
FACILITY IN MOUNTAIN VIEW THAT
PROVIDED POWER AND WATER HOOKUPS
IS NOW A CONSTRUCTION SITE.
IT CLOSED LAST YEAR AFTER A
DEVELOPER BOUGHT THE PROPERTY TO
BUILD MILLION-DOLLAR TOWNHOUSES.
THIS SUMMER, THE CITY OF
MOUNTAIN VIEW COUNTED 126
VEHICLES BEING USED AS HOMES.
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO GET
GOOD NUMBERS BECAUSE HOMELESS
INDIVIDUALS ARE OFTEN TRYING TO
REMAIN HIDDEN.
>> Reporter: TOM MYERS IS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF MOUNTAIN
VIEW'S COMMUNITY SERVICES
AGENCY.
>> PEOPLE LIVING IN VEHICLES TO
THIS TYPE OF DEGREE AND NUMBER
IS COMPLETELY NEW AND COMPLETELY
UNHEARD OF IN THIS COMMUNITY.
PEOPLE LIVING IN THEIR VEHICLES
IS SOMETHING THAT WE ARE REALLY,
AS A COMMUNITY, ILL-EQUIPPED TO
BE ABLE TO HANDLE.
>> Reporter: DELMI RUIZ IS
PREPARING DINNER IN THE CRAMPED
R.V. SHE MOVED INTO WITH HER
HUSBAND AND THREE KIDS LAST
NOVEMBER.
RUIZ HAS WORKED AS A HOUSEKEEPER
IN MOUNTAIN VIEW FOR TEN YEARS.
HER HUSBAND CLEANS OFFICES.
SHE SAYS THE LANDLORD OF HER
LAST APARTMENT RAISED THEIR RENT
THREE TIMES IN THE YEAR BEFORE
THEY MOVED OUT.
>> (translated): THE RENT
STARTED INCREASING, AND WE WERE
NO LONGER ABLE TO PAY FOR IT.
>> Reporter: SO, WHY DO YOU STAY
IN MOUNTAIN VIEW?
>> (translated): BECAUSE WE'VE
ALWAYS LIVED IN MOUNTAIN VIEW.
BEFORE, IT WAS POSSIBLE TO LIVE
HERE AND PAY FOR RENT BECAUSE IT
WAS CHEAP.
BUT IT'S BECOME IMPOSSIBLE TO
LIVE HERE.
>> Reporter: FOR OTHER DISPLACED
RESIDENTS WHO CHOOSE TO STAY IN
MOUNTAIN VIEW, EVEN AN R.V. IS
TOO EXPENSIVE.
DWAYNE GOLSTEIN MAKES $30,000 A
YEAR AS A PATHOLOGY LAB
TECHNICIAN, BUT HE LIVED IN THIS
RENTED MINI-VAN FOR TWO MONTHS.
IT WAS RETROFITTED WITH A
MATTRESS AND WINDOW CURTAINS.
HE SAYS IT WAS CHEAPER AND HAD
MORE PRIVACY THAN THE BOARDING
HOUSE WHERE HE'D LIVED BEFORE.
>> $200 A WEEK FOR A BUNK BED IN
A ROOM WITH FIVE OTHER BUNK
BEDS.
>> Reporter: HE SAVED MONEY, BUT
IT WASN'T EASY.
>> I REALLY HAD TO SIT DOWN AND
BE HONEST WITH MYSELF AND SAY,
COULD I GET UP EVERY DAY AND
TAKE THE NECESSARY DISCIPLINE TO
NOT EAT AFTER A CERTAIN HOUR?
MAKE SURE I THAT I CHARGE MY
DEVICES EVERY EVENING; GET UP IN
TIME IF I NEED TO MOVE THE VAN
BECAUSE OF PARKING TICKETS AND
SO FORTH.
DO THAT ON TOP OF THE EVERYDAY
RIGORS OF GETTING DRESSED AND
BEING PRESENTABLE FOR MY
EMPLOYMENT.
>> Reporter: TO KEEP HIMSELF
CLEAN AND PRESENTABLE, FOR $35 A
MONTH, GOLSTEIN JOINED A 24-HOUR
GYM WITH SHOWERS.
>> IT'S USUALLY COLD IN THE
EVENING TIMES WHEN I GO TO THE
GYM OR WHEN I COME IN, SO I KEEP
MY SWEATER.
THIS IS MY LAUNDRY, WHICH I'LL
TAKE TO THE LAUNDROMAT ONCE A
WEEK.
>> Reporter: FOR THOSE LIVING IN
VEHICLES WHO CAN'T AFFORD A GYM
MEMBERSHIP, THE NON-PROFIT
DIGNITY ON WHEELS OFFERS MOBILE
SHOWER AND LAUNDRY SERVICES.
FOR HIS PART, GOLSTEIN HAS MOVED
BACK INTO A SHARED APARTMENT.
SOME MOUNTAIN VIEW RESIDENTS
LIVING IN VEHICLES CAN EASILY
AFFORD AN APARTMENT BUT CHOOSE
TO SAVE MONEY AND ROUGH IT.
BRANDON, WHO'S 23 AND DECLINED
TO GIVE HIS LAST NAME, EARNS
$175,000 A YEAR AS A SOFTWARE
ENGINEER.
WE AGREED NOT TO NAME HIS
EMPLOYER.
HE SLEEPS IN THIS WINDOWLESS
MOVING TRUCK PARKED A FEW BLOCKS
FROM HIS OFFICE IN MOUNTAIN
VIEW.
HE SAYS HE HAS ALL THE AMENITIES
HE NEEDS AT WORK.
>> SO, THERE ARE GYMS ON THE
CAMPUS WHERE I WORK.
THERE ARE SHOWERS THERE,
NATURALLY.
THEY HAVE CAFES WHERE YOU CAN
GRAB BREAKFAST, LUNCH AND
DINNER.
SO, I THOUGHT IT DIDN'T MAKE A
LOT OF SENSE FOR ME TO REPLICATE
THAT WHOLE ENVIRONMENT AT HOME,
ESPECIALLY WHEN I WOULDN'T BE
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF IT.
>> Reporter: BRANDON'S BEEN
LIVING IN HIS TRUCK FOR MORE
THAN A YEAR AND WRITING A BLOG
ABOUT HIS EXPERIENCE CALLED
"FROM INSIDE THE BOX."
>> IT'S A SUBSTANTIAL SUM OF
MONEY THAT I WOULD HAVE JUST
BEEN EFFECTIVELY BURNING ON
RENT.
THERE'S NO EQUITY BEING BUILT UP
ON ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: THE SAVINGS HELPED
BRANDON PAY OFF HIS $20,000
STUDENT LOAN DEBT.
HE'S NOW MAXING OUT
CONTRIBUTIONS TO HIS RETIREMENT
PLAN.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE BLAMING THE
HIGH COST OF HOUSING ON THE TECH
COMPANIES AND ON THE TECH
WORKERS.
>> YEAH, YOU HAVE ALL THESE
HIGH-PAID WORKERS COMING INTO
THE AREA.
PEOPLE OR LANDLORDS KNOW THEY
CAN CHARGE MORE FOR RENT.
IT ENDS UP BECOMING TOTALLY
UNSUSTAINABLE AND INTRACTABLE
FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE THE
SORT OF RESOURCES THAT THESE
TECH WORKERS HAVE.
SO, I THINK THEY'RE PERFECTLY
JUSTIFIED IN BLAMING US.
>> Reporter: AS THE LARGEST
EMPLOYER IN MOUNTAIN VIEW,
GOOGLE RECOGNIZES ITS HIGH
SALARIES HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO AN
INFLATED HOUSING MARKET.
REBECCA PROZAN IS A PUBLIC
POLICY MANAGER AT THE COMPANY'S
SAN FRANCISCO OFFICE.
>> OBVIOUSLY, OUR FOOTPRINT
CREATES PRESSURE.
IT CREATES PRESSURE ON HOUSING
AND TRANSPORTATION.
BUT THAT PRESSURE ISN'T JUST
TECH.
IT'S NOT JUST GOOGLE.
IT'S ALL THE INDUSTRIES THAT ARE
CREATING THE ECONOMY OF THE BAY
AREA.
WE ALL HAVE TO WORK TOGETHER TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
LOOK LIKE, AND HOW WE'RE GOING
TO LIVE.
>> Reporter: PROZAN DID NOT WANT
TO ADDRESS PUBLISHED REPORTS
ABOUT A HANDFUL OF ITS EMPLOYEES
LIVING IN VEHICLES TO SAVE
MONEY.
>> I THINK THE ISSUE IS THAT WE
DON'T NECESSARILY WANT TO
COMMENT ONOUREMPLOYEES
PARTICIPATING IN THOSE
ACTIVITIES.
>> Reporter: BUT SHE SAID GOOGLE
IS COMMITTED TO ADDRESSING THE
PROBLEM OF HOMELESSNESS IN THE
BAY AREA.
IN MOUNTAIN VIEW ALONE, THE
COMPANY HAS PLEDGED $1 MILLION
FOR A "RAPID REHOUSING" PROGRAM.
>> THIS SPECIFIC GRANT WILL WORK
TO HELP THOSE WHO ARE ON THE
FRINGES-- EITHER ABOUT TO LOSE
THEIR HOME OR ABOUT TO GET INTO
A HOME IN THE FORM OF TIME-
LIMITED PAYMENTS, MOTEL ROOMS,
THINGS OF THAT NATURE-- TO
REALLY MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE ARE
ABLE TO HAVE A HOME AND NOT LIVE
IN A CAR.
>> Reporter: SEVERAL CALIFORNIA
CITIES HAVE PROHIBITED PEOPLE
FROM LIVING IN VEHICLES PARKED
ON PUBLIC STREETS, BUT, IN 2014,
A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT STRUCK
DOWN A LOS ANGELES LAW THAT IT
SAID "OPENS THE DOOR TO
DISCRIMINATORY ENFORCEMENT
AGAINST THE HOMELESS AND THE
POOR."
THAT CAUSED L.A. AND OTHER
CITIES TO RESCIND THEIR BANS.
CERTAINLY, MOUNTAIN VIEW
OFFICIALS HEAR THEIR SHARE OF
COMPLAINTS.
>> I HAVE MIXED FEELINGS.
YOU KNOW, I FEEL SORRY FOR THE
PEOPLE THAT ARE THERE, BUT WE
PAY A TON OF RENT TO LIVE IN OUR
BUILDING, AND THERE'S, LIKE, A
LOT OF GARBAGE.
>> Reporter: THE SITES I SAW
WERE MOSTLY CLEAN, AND PEOPLE
LIVING IN VEHICLES SAY THE
POLICE HAVE BEEN TOLERANT.
MOUNTAIN VIEW MAYOR PAT SHOWATER
SAYS HER APPROACH IS TO OFFER
HELP, NOT PUNISHMENT.
>> THE INTENT IS TO GET
EVERYBODY THE SHELTER THAT THEY
NEED.
IT JUST DOESN'T SEEM LIKE
IMPOUNDING SOMEBODY'S VEHICLE,
CHARGING THEM MANY, MANY DOLLARS
TO GET IT BACK WHEN THEY DON'T
HAVE MUCH MONEY TO START WITH,
IT JUST SEEMS LIKE, HOW DOES
THAT HELP?
WHAT'S THE VALUE OF THAT?
>> Brangham: JUDGING BY THE
PROLIFERATION OF TV SHOWS,
MINISERIES AND PODCASTS ABOUT
OUR LEGAL SYSTEM, YOU'D THINK
JURY TRIALS ARE THE NORM.
BUT A NEW ANALYSIS OF FEDERAL
COURT CASES INDICATES THAT THE
TREND IS ACTUALLY MOVING IN A
DIFFERENT DIRECTION.
A STORY IN THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
LAST SUNDAY SHOWED, IN 1997, OF
THE 63,000 FEDERAL DEFENDANTS,
3,200 WERE CONVICTED IN JURY
TRIALS.
BUT BY 2015, EVEN AS THE NUMBER
OF FEDERAL DEFENDANTS GREW TO
81,000, JURY CONVICTIONS DROPPED
BY HALF TO JUST 1,650.
REPORTER BENJAMIN WISER WROTE
THE STORY AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
MAINE TO HELP US UNDERSTAND
WHAT'S GOING ON.
SO, BENJAMIN WHAT IS DRIVING
THIS DECLINE?
>> THERE APPEAR TO BE A LOT OF
REASONS.
PEOPLE PARTICULARLY POINTED OUT
TO ME THE SENTENCING GUIDELINES
WHICH CONGRESS PASSED A NUMBER
OF YEARS AGO, MANDATORY MINIMUM
SENTENCES WHICH SET A FLOOR FOR
CERTAIN CRIMES UNDER WHICH
SOMEONE CANNOT RECEIVE A
SENTENCE.
AND AS A RESULT, THERE WAS AT
LEAST, FOR A PERIOD AND REMAINS,
AN INCENTIVE THAT DRIVES MANY
DEFENDANTS TO DECIDE THAT IT--
YOU KNOW, AFTER A RISK-BENEFIT
ANALYSIS, THAT IT MAKES MUCH
MORE SENSE TO PLEAD GUILTY AND
TAKE THEIR RISKS AT PERHAPS
GETTING A LOWER SENTENCE THAN IF
THEY GO TO TRIAL AND ARE
CONVICTED.
>> Brangham: IS THERE A DOWN
SIDE TO THIS?
JUST OFFHAND, I CAN IMAGINE SOME
PRETTY CONSIDERABLE SAVINGS TO
TAXPAYERS IF WE DON'T HAVE AN
ENDLESS AMOUNT OF JURY TRIALS
GOING ON.
WHAT'S THE DOWN SIDE HERE?
>> YOU KNOW, THE MOST PATROL
ISSUE THAT PEOPLE POINTED OUT TO
ME, INCLUDING A NUMBER OF
JUDGES, IS THAT SO MUCH IN THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM DOES NOT
HAPPEN IN PUBLIC BUT THE ONE
THING THAT DOES IS A TRIAL.
AND WHEN YOU SEE A CRIMINAL
TRIAL BEFORE A JURY, EVERYTHING
IS OUT THERE.
THE GOVERNMENT'S EVIDENCE IS
TESTED.
THE DEFENSE, OF COURSE, GETS ITS
BEST SHOT.
THE PUBLIC GETS TO SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING.
AND THIS IS PARTICULARLY
IMPORTANT.
AND I HAVE SEEN THIS IN RECENT
POLITICAL CORRUPTION TRIALS, FOR
EXAMPLE, WHERE THE GOVERNMENT
GOT TO LAY OUT THE EVIDENCE IT
WAS BRINGING.
WITHOUT TRIALS, WITH ONLY PLEAS,
PLEA BARGAINS, MUCH OF THAT
HAPPENS BEHIND CLOSED DOORS AND
SEVERAL JUDGES TO ME SAID IT'S
VERY DISAPPOINTING THAT AS THE
NUMBER OF TRIALS DISAPPEAR, THE
PUBLIC NATURE OF WHAT HAPPENS IN
THE COURTHOUSE ALSO VANISHES.
>> Brangham: IS THE CONCERN
THAT THIS JUST TIPS THE BALANCE
IN WELL, TOO MUCH IN FAVOR OF
PROSECUTIONS BECAUSE THEIR
EVIDENCE NEVER REALLY GETS
SCRUTINIZED IN COURT?
>> WELL, SOME PEOPLE SAY THAT,
AND THERE'S A DEBATE.
PROSECUTORS BRING CASES, AND
THEY WOULD ARGUE THAT THEY BRING
ONLY THE STRONGEST CASES, THE
CASES THAT THEY BELIEVE THEY CAN
WIN AT TRIAL.
DEFENSE LAWYERS OFTEN FEEL FROM
AN ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE, IT
REALLY MAKES SENSE FOR THEIR
DEFENDANT TO PLEAD GUILTY IF
THEY REALLY THINK THEY'RE GOING
TO GET CONVICTED AT TRIAL.
AND TO SOME EXTENT, THE NUMBER
OF PLEAS THAT ARE HAMMERED OUT
ALLOW THE SYSTEM TO KEEP MOVING
FORWARD.
BUT IT IS A FACT THAT THERE ARE
FEWER CRIMINAL JURY TRIALS, AND
THIS NUMBER HAS ACTUALLY BEEN
GOING DOWN OVER THE LAST 20,
HITTER, 40 YEARS.
JUST HAPPENS THAT IN THE
MANHATTAN FEDERAL COURTHOUSE
THAT I'VE BEEN COVERING IT
SEEMED PARTICULARLY PRONOUNCED
IN RECENT MONTHS, AND I BEGAN
ASKING ABOUT IT AT THE TIME.
>> Brangham: ONE OF THE
NEGATIVES OF THIS, AS YOU QUOTE
IN YOUR STORY, A LOT OF FEDERAL
JUDGES JUST FEEL THEIR JOBS ARE
INCREDIBLY BORING.
BUT ARE THERE OTHER UP SIDES TO
THIS, NOT HAVING SO MANY TRIALS?
>> IT CERTAINLY IS TRUE, FOR A
DEFENDANT A PLEA TO PERHAPS ONE
CHARGE THAT DOES NOT CARRY, IN
THE CASE WE WROTE ABOUT, A
MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCE,
ALLOWS A DEFENDANT NOT TO SPEND
AS MUCH TIME IN PRISON AS HE
MIGHT HAVE HAD HE GONE TO TRIAL
AND BEEN CONVICTED.
SUMMER, THIS WAS AN UPSIDE
THERE.
AND IN THE CASE WE CITED, THE
DEFENSE LAWYER WHO I QUOTED
SAID, YOU KNOW, THIS DEFENDANT
REALLY HAD NO CHOICE.
HE HAD BEEN CHARGED WITH TWO
COUNTS.
ONE HAD A MANDATORY MINIMUM OF
20 YEARS.
THE OTHER HAD NO MANDATORY
MINIMUM.
HOWEVER, THE DEFENSE LAWYER FELT
THAT THEIR CASE WAS TRIABLE,
THAT ELEMENTS OF IT WERE WEAK,
AND THAT THERE MIGHT HAVE BEEN A
SHOT AT LEAST, YOU KNOW, MAKE
SOMETHING PROGRESS ON IN THE
COURTROOM, BUT THAT WOULD BE
NEVER TESTED.
>> Brangham: AS YOU REPORT IN
YOURISTIC THESE MANDATORY
MINIMUMS HAVE BEEN LOOSENED
SOMEWHAT RECENTLY.
SO IS THERE ANY SENSE THAT THIS
TREND IS GOING TO CHANGE AT ALL?
>> IT IS A FACT THEREAT NUMBER
OF TRIALS TRIALS HAS DIMINISHED
IN THE FEDERAL COURT IN
MANHATTAN, AND STATEWIDE, AND
THE FEDERAL COURTS DATING BACK
TO 1980 NATIONALLY ARE SEETHE
SAME TREND.
I DON'T KNOW HOW IT'S GOING TO
CHANGE OR IF IT'S GOING TO
CHANGE.
IT'S A TOUGH QUESTION.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT,
BENJAMIN WEISER OF THE "NEW
YORK TIMES," THANKS VERY MUCH
FOR BEING HERE.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Brangham: FIDEL CASTRO TURNED
90 YEARS OLD TODAY, THE MAN WHO
RULED CUBA FROM ITS 1959
COMMUNIST REVOLUTION UNTIL HE
STEPPED DOWN AS PRESIDENT IN
2008.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO HAS MORE ON HOW CASTRO
AND CUBANS CELEBRATED THE
MILESTONE.
>>FELICIDADES, FIDEL!
>> Reporter: WITH A FIREWORKS
DISPLAY AT MIDNIGHT, THOUSANDS
OF CUBANS CROWDED HAVANA'S
MALECON TO PAY HOMAGE TO THE MAN
WHO RULED OVER THEM FOR HALF A
CENTURY.
A NEW MUSEUM EXHIBIT IN HAVANA
FEATURES A SET OF 300 RARELY
SEEN IMAGES OF CASTRO, MANY
TAKEN BY HIS SON, ALEX.
TO HONOR CASTRO'S 90 YEARS,
CIGAR ROLLER JOSE CASTELAR
ROLLED A 90-METER CIGAR, SETTING
A "GUINNESS BOOK" WORLD RECORD
FOR THE LONGEST CIGAR.
CASTRO WAS ALWAYS KNOWN TO ENJOY
THE COUNTRY'S MOST FAMOUS
EXPORT.
BORN IN 1926, CASTRO LED THE
OVERTHROW OF U.S.-BACKED CUBAN
LEADER FULGENCIO BATISTA IN
1959.
CASTRO ESTABLISHED THE FIRST
COMMUNIST STATE IN THE WESTERN
HEMISPHERE AND STAYED THE COURSE
EVEN AS THE SOVIET UNION, WHICH
SUPPORTED HIS REGIME WITH
BILLIONS IN AID, CRUMBLED.
CASTRO HANDED POWER TO HIS
BROTHER RAUL IN 2008, AND, IN
HIS LAST PUBLIC APPEARANCE IN
APRIL, CASTRO CALLED ON THE
CUBAN COMMUNIST PARTY TO STICK
TO ITS FOUNDING PRINCIPLES.
TODAY, CASTRO RELEASED A LETTER
THROUGH STATE MEDIA, THANKING
CUBANS FOR THEIR SUPPORT,
REMINISCING ABOUT HIS YOUTH AND
CRITICIZING PRESIDENT OBAMA FOR
NOT APOLOGIZING DURING A MAY
TRIP TO JAPAN FOR THE U.S.
ATOMIC BOMBINGS THAT ENDED WORLD
WAR II.
CASTRO'S LETTER MADE NO MENTION
OF THE U.S. NORMALIZING
RELATIONS WITH CUBA, OR LIFTING
THE TRADE EMBARGO THAT CASTRO
CRITICIZED FOR DECADES.
COMMERCIAL FLIGHTS BETWEEN THE
U.S. AND CUBA RESUME LATER THIS
MONTH.
>> Brangham: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY:
ONE MAN'S EFFORTS TO RID THE
OCEAN OF PLASTICS TAKES A BOLD
FIRST STEP.
>> AT FIRST, A LOT OF PEOPLE
TOLD ME IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE.
BUT REALLY THE ONLY WAY TO FIND
OUT IS TO ACTUALLY TRY AND GO
AND DO IT.
>> Brangham: FINALLY TONIGHT,
THE ANNUAL PERSEID METEOR
SHOWER IS PEAKING THIS WEEKEND
OVER THE NORTHERN HEMISPHERE.
BECAUSE OF THE GRAVITATIONAL
PULL FROM JUPITER, THESE BITS OF
COSMIC DEBRIS ARE CLOSER TO
EARTH AND MORE CONCENTRATED THAN
USUAL, DOUBLING THE NUMBER OF
METEORS THAT CAN BE SEEN DASHING
ACROSS THE SKY.
THIS SHOOTING STAR EFFECT IS
CREATED, IN THIS CASE, WHEN
PARTICLES OF DUST FROM THE WAKE
OF A COMET BURN UP AS THEY ENTER
EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE AT 130,000
MILES AN HOUR.
AND THE BEST-KNOWN ACTOR YOU
NEVER SAW HAS DIED.
BRITAIN'S KENNY BAKER PLAYED THE
DROID R2-D2 IN THE FIRST SIX
"STAR WARS" MOVIES.
THE THREE-FOOT-EIGHT BAKER SAID
HE TOOK THE ROLE AS A FAVOR TO
DIRECTOR GEORGE LUCAS.
KENNY BAKER WAS 81 YEARS OLD.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
GOOD NIGHT.